--- Page 1 ---

Struct Multidisc Optim (2010) 41:853–862
DOI 10.1007/s00158-009-0460-7
RESEARCH PAPER
The weighted sum method for multi-objective
optimization: new insights
R. Timothy Marler · Jasbir S. Arora
Received: 17 April 2009 / Revised: 17 September 2009 / Accepted: 17 November 2009 / Published online: 12 December 2009
c⃝Springer-Verlag 2009
Abstract As a common concept in multi-objective opti-
mization, minimizing a weighted sum constitutes an inde-
pendent method as well as a component of other methods.
Consequently, insight into characteristics of the weighted
sum method has far reaching implications. However, despite
the many published applications for this method and the lit-
erature addressing its pitfalls with respect to depicting the
Pareto optimal set, there is little comprehensive discussion
concerning the conceptual signiﬁcance of the weights and
techniques for maximizing the effectiveness of the method
with respect to a priori articulation of preferences. Thus,
in this paper, we investigate the fundamental signiﬁcance
of the weights in terms of preferences, the Pareto optimal
set, and objective-function values. We determine the factors
that dictate which solution point results from a particular
set of weights. Fundamental deﬁciencies are identiﬁed in
terms of a priori articulation of preferences, and guidelines
are provided to help avoid blind use of the method.
Keywords Multi-objective optimization · Weighted sum ·
Preferences
R. T. Marler (B)
Center for Computer Aided Design, College of Engineering;
111 ERF, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA
e-mail: tmarler@engineering.uiowa.edu
J. S. Arora
Center for Computer Aided Design, College of Engineering;
238 ERF, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA
e-mail: jsarora@engineering.uiowa.edu
1 Introduction
Despite deﬁciencies with respect to depicting the Pareto
optimal set, the weighted sum method for multi-objective
optimization (MOO) continues to be used extensively not
only to provide multiple solution points by varying the
weights consistently, but also to provide a single solu-
tion point that reﬂects preferences presumably incorporated
in the selection of a single set of weights. However, the
method’s effectiveness in this latter capacity has not been
studied thoroughly. To be sure, there are many different
approaches for determining the weights (Marler and Arora
2004), but ultimately, however, these are all just different
processes for organizing one’s preferences and priorities.
Instead of proposing yet another algorithm for translating
preferences into weights, we focus on the mathematical
characteristics of the solution and on the fundamental con-
ceptual meaning of the weights. Furthermore, we determine
the factors that dictate which Pareto optimal solution point
results from a particular set of weights. Through this anal-
ysis, we augment the currently available literature and pro-
vide new insight into the nature of the method and new ideas
for maximizing its effectiveness with respect to articulating
preferences.
New understanding of the fundamentals presented in this
paper, is useful in setting the weights directly (without the
use of an additional algorithm). In addition, understanding
inadequacies that are inherent in the method is instructive,
and in this vein, we present deﬁciencies that cannot be
avoided and that have not been discussed in the current
literature.
Setting weights is just one approach to articulating pref-
erences, and it is applicable to many different methods.
Consequently, understanding how the weights affect the
solution to the weighted sum method has implications


--- Page 2 ---

854
R.T. Marler, J.S. Arora
concerning other approaches that involve similar method-
parameters.
1.1 Overview of the formulation
The general multi-objective optimization (MOO) problem
is posed as follows:
Minimize
x
: F (x) = [F1 (x) , F2 (x) , · · · , Fk (x)]T
subject to : g j (x) ≤0; j = 1, 2, . . . , m
(1)
where k is the number of objective functions and m is the
number of inequality constraints. x ∈En is a vector of
design variables, and F (x) ∈Ek is a vector of objective
functions Fi (x) : En →E1. The feasible design space
is deﬁned as X =

x
g j (x) ≤0, j = 1, 2, ..., m

. The
feasible criterion space is deﬁned as Z = {F (x) |x ∈X}.
The idea of a solution for (1) can be unclear, because
a single point that minimizes all objectives simultaneously
usually does not exist. Consequently, the idea of Pareto opti-
mality is used to describe solutions for MOO problems. A
solution point is Pareto optimal if it is not possible to move
from that point and improve at least one objective function
without detriment to any other objective function. Alterna-
tively, a point is weakly Pareto optimal if it is not possible
to move from that point and improve all objective functions
simultaneously.
Solving a particular MOO formulation can serve as a
necessary and/or sufﬁcient condition for Pareto optimality,
and a method’s performance in this capacity is important.
However, these characterizations veer slightly from their
meaning in terms of single-objective optimization. If a for-
mulation provides a necessary condition, then for a point
to be Pareto optimal, it must be a solution to that formu-
lation. Consequently, the method can yield every Pareto
optimal point as a solution. However, some solutions to a
formulation that provides a necessary condition may not be
Pareto optimal. Alternatively, if a formulation provides a
sufﬁcient condition, then its solution is always Pareto opti-
mal, although such a formulation may not be able to capture
all of the Pareto optimal points.
Typically, there are inﬁnitely many Pareto optimal solu-
tions for a multi-objective problem. Thus, it is often neces-
sary to incorporate user preferences for various objectives in
order to determine a single suitable solution. With methods
that incorporate a priori articulation of preferences, the user
indicates preferences before running the optimization algo-
rithm and subsequently allows the algorithm to determine
a single solution that presumably reﬂects such preferences.
Alternatively, with a posteriori articulation of preferences,
one manually selects a single solution from a representa-
tion of the Pareto optimal set. This paper focuses on the
use of the weighted sum method for a priori articulation,
while its use for a posteriori articulation has been addressed
thoroughly in the literature.
Using the weighted sum method to solve the problem in
(1) entails selecting scalar weights wi and minimizing the
following composite objective function:
U =
k

i=1
wi Fi(x)
(2)
If all of the weights are positive, as assumed in this
study, then minimizing (2) provides a sufﬁcient condition
for Pareto optimality, which means the minimum of (2)
is always Pareto optimal (Zadeh 1963; Goicoechea et al.
1982). Although some literature indicates that k
i=1 wi = 1
and w ≥0, if any one of the weights is zero, there is a
potential for the solution to be only weakly Pareto optimal.
With regards to the design space,
minimizing the
weighted sum provides a necessary condition if the multi-
objective problem is convex, which means the feasible
design space is convex (each constraint is convex) and all of
the objective functions are convex (Geoffrion 1968; Koski
1985; Miettinen 1999). A function deﬁned on a convex set
is convex if and only if the Hessian matrix of the function
is positive semideﬁnite or positive deﬁnite at all points in
the set. Thus, if the Hessian matrix for each constraint and
for each objective function is positive semideﬁnite or posi-
tive deﬁnite, then the weighted sum method can provide all
Pareto optimal points (the complete Pareto optimal curve).
With regards to the criterion space, because the Pareto
optimal set is always on the boundary of the feasible crite-
rion space Z, some studies suggest that Z must be convex
for the weighted sum method to yield all of the Pareto opti-
mal points (Stadler 1995; Athan and Papalambros 1996).
However, Lin (1975) demonstrates that, in fact, if Z is
only p-directionally convex (Holtzman and Halkin 1966)
for any deﬁnitely negative vector p, then the weighted sum
approach provides a necessary condition. The term deﬁ-
nitely negative implies p < 0. p-directionally convex is
deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 1 p-Directionally Convex: Given a nonzero vec-
tor p ∈Ek, Z ⊂Ek is said to be p-directionally convex if
given any two different points in Z, F1 and F2, and any two
positive scalars, w1 and w2, with w1 + w2 = 1, there is a
positive number β such that w1F1 + w2F2 + βp∈Z.
This means that only the portion of the feasible criterion
space that is visible when looking in the direction of p from
within the feasible space needs to be convex. Therefore,
only the Pareto optimal hypersurface needs to be convex for
the weighted sum method to provide a necessary condition
for Pareto optimality. Currently, the authors do not know of
any method for predicting whether or not the Pareto optimal
hypersurface is convex.


--- Page 3 ---

The weighted sum method for multi-objective optimization
855
1.2 Review of the literature and motivation
Following the introduction of the weighted sum method
by Zadeh (1963), the method has been mentioned promi-
nently in the literature. However, most general treatments of
MOO simply outline the weighted sum approach and indi-
cate that it provides a Pareto optimal solution. Intricacies of
the method and of the solutions that it yields are typically
not discussed. In particular, the signiﬁcance of the weights
is not thoroughly explored, and thus, despite the presence of
many algorithms for determining weight values, no funda-
mental guidelines have been presented for selecting weights
for accurate a priori articulation of preferences.
The weighted sum method is often presented strictly as
a tool, especially over the past few years, and literature
regarding examples of applications is extensive. However,
the focus is on the application, and the problems tend to
be limited to those with just two objective functions. For
instance, as development for a new approach, Koski and
Silvennoinen (1987) provide an early application and use
the weighted sum method to obtain multiple Pareto opti-
mal solutions with a systematic change in the weights,
while minimizing the volume and the nodal displacement
of a four-bar space truss. Kassaimah et al. (1995) use
the method for the two-objective optimization of laminated
plates, where critical buckling shear stress is maximized and
deﬂection is minimized. A few different somewhat arbitrary
sets of weights are considered, and the corresponding solu-
tions are compared, but the method itself is not studied and
the articulation of preferences is not considered. Proos et al.
(2001) apply the method to topology optimization, mini-
mizing compliance and maximizing the ﬁrst mode of the
natural frequency, for two-dimensional plane stress prob-
lems. Again, the weights are altered to yield a representation
of the Pareto optimal set. Saramago and Steffen (1998) use
a weighted sum to combine two objective functions in an
optimization-based approach to predicting robotic motion,
but the weights have the same value and are thus irrelevant.
Marler and Arora (2005) study a three-objective prob-
lem, but they use the weighted sum method as a platform for
studying various function-transformation methods and their
affect on the depiction of the Pareto optimal set. It is found
that a convex combination of functions is advantageous for
depicting the Pareto optimal set, as apposed to determin-
ing a single solution. In addition, it is shown that some
transformation methods can actually be detrimental to the
process of obtaining a diverse and uniform spread of Pareto
optimal points, and criteria are presented for determining
when certain transformation methods (in conjunction with
the weighted sum method) may not perform well.
Some literature provides a more substantial look at the
method, focusing on its two primary deﬁciencies when
representing the Pareto optimal set for a posteriori articu-
lation of preferences. First, many authors demonstrate the
method’s inability to capture Pareto optimal points that lie
on non-convex portions of the Pareto optimal curve (Koski
1985; Stadler and Dauer 1992; Stadler 1995; Chen et al.
1999; Athan and Papalambros 1996; Huang et al. 2007).
Secondly, it is well known that the method does not pro-
vide an even distribution of points in the Pareto optimal set,
with a consistent change in weights, where even implies a
consistent Euclidean distance between consecutive solution
points. Das and Dennis (1997) evaluate why this deﬁciency
occurs, and for a two-objective problem, they derive the
explicit form of the unique Pareto optimal curve for which
an even distribution of weights yields an even distribution of
Pareto solutions. In general, however, the points that result
from a systematic selection of weights may cluster together.
These two deﬁciencies are often answered with alternative
methods for representing a Pareto optimal set (Das and
Dennis 1998; Tappeta et al. 2000; Messac and Mattson
2002; Messac et al. 2003; Huang et al. 2007; Zhang et al.
2008). Such alternatives can be effective and valuable, but
they are usually independent of the weighted sum method.
Although the difﬁculties mentioned above are well doc-
umented, they concern the method’s use for yielding a
complete Pareto optimal set rather than a single solution (a
priori articulation of preferences). Criteria for maximizing
the effectiveness of the method in the latter respect are not
available. In fact, there are few, if any numerical studies of
the weighted sum method that focus on a priori articulation
of preferences. Essentially, there is no fundamental unifying
analysis of the method.
Many researchers have, however, developed systematic
approaches to selecting weights, surveys of which are pro-
vided by Eckenrode (1965), Hobbs (1980), Hwang and
Yoon (1981), and Voogd (1983). We identify two broad
classes of approaches, but with these approaches, weights
may still be set ineffectively in terms of accurately articulat-
ing preferences. With rating methods, the decision-maker
assigns independent values of relative importance to each
objective function. With ranking methods (Yoon and Hwang
1995), which can be viewed as a subset of rating methods,
the different objective functions are ordered by importance.
Then, the least important objective receives a weight of one,
and integer weights with consistent increments are assigned
to objectives that are more important. The same approach
is used with categorization methods, in which different
objectives are grouped in broad categories such as highly
important and moderately important. Ratio questioning or
paired comparison methods are also common and provide
systematic means to rate objective functions by comparing
two objectives at a time. In this vein, Saaty (1977, 2003),
and Saaty and Hu (1998) provide an eigenvalue method
for determining weights, which involves k(k −1)/2 pair-
wise comparisons between objective functions. This yields


--- Page 4 ---

856
R.T. Marler, J.S. Arora
a comparison matrix, and the eigenvalues of the matrix are
used as the weights. Rao and Roy (1989) discuss a method
for determining weights based on fuzzy set theory. While
disregarding preferences, Gennert and Yuille (1988) suggest
that the weights should be selected to maximize the ﬁnal
minimum value of the weighted sum function. For the most
part, algorithms for determining weights that reﬂect user
preferences either fall into the category of rating methods
or paired comparison methods.
Although the above-mentioned algorithms provide valid
processes for determining the weights, there is little rigor-
ous investigation as to what the weights actually represent.
Thus, this paper studies the signiﬁcance of the weights
themselves. By considering the fundamental signiﬁcance of
the weights from different viewpoints, we uncover intrinsic
ﬂaws in the rating methods and paired comparison meth-
ods for a priori articulation of preferences. In addition, we
identify which factors govern which solution is determined
from a speciﬁc set of weights, and we explain why even
with an effective algorithm that helps one decide on values
for the weights, a weighted sum is not necessarily capable
of incorporating preferences completely.
2 Interpretation of the weights
One often views the weights as general gauges of relative
importance for each objective function. However, selecting
a set of weights that reﬂects preference towards one objec-
tive or another can be difﬁcult, because preferences tend
to be indistinct. In addition, even with full knowledge of
the objectives and satisfactory selection of weights, the ﬁnal
solution may not necessarily reﬂect the intended preferences
that are supposedly incorporated in the weights. Nonethe-
less, the speciﬁc Pareto optimal point that is provided as the
solution depends on which weights are used, so it is impor-
tant to determine how the weights relate to preferences,
to the Pareto optimal set, and to the individual objective
functions. These relationships are explored in this section.
2.1 Preferences
First, the relationship between preferences and weights is
examined. Concurrently, the theoretical foundation of rat-
ing methods is studied. We discover that such methods
allow one to inadvertently set the weights according to the
relative magnitude of the objective functions rather than
the relative importance of the objectives. In this way, we
demonstrate how function-transformation can be advanta-
geous with a priori articulation of preferences. In addition,
we reveal inherent deﬁciencies in the weighted sum method
with respect to its capacity for incorporating preferences.
A preference function is an abstract function (of points
in the criterion space) in the mind of the decision-maker,
which perfectly incorporates his/her preferences. Most
MOO methods that involve minimizing a single aggregated
objective function, attempt to approximate the preference
function with some mathematical representation, called a
utility function. The gradients of the preference function
P[F(x)] and the utility function in (2) are given respectively
as follows:
∇xP [F (x)] =
k

i=1
∂P
∂Fi
∇xFi (x)
(3)
∇xU =
k

i=1
wi∇xFi (x)
(4)
Each component of the gradient ∇xP qualitatively repre-
sents how the decision-maker’s satisfaction changes with
a change in the design point and a consequent change in
function values. Comparing (3) and (4) suggests that if the
weights are selected properly, then the utility function can
have a gradient that is parallel to the gradient of the prefer-
ence function. This is signiﬁcant because the purpose of any
utility function is to approximate the preference function,
so imposing similarities between these two functions such
as parallel gradients, can result in a more accurate repre-
sentation of one’s preferences. If the utility function should
ideally be the same as the preference function, then certainly
the gradients of the two functions should be the same as
well.
The above relationships indicate that wi represents
∂P/∂Fi. Conceptually, ∂P/∂Fi is the approximate change
in the preference-function value (change in a decision-
maker’s satisfaction) that results from a change in the
objective-function value for Fi. In this way, ∂P/∂Fi pro-
vides a mathematical deﬁnition or metric for the importance
of Fi. However, it only makes sense to consider the impor-
tance of an objective or change in preference-function value,
in relative terms. Thus, the value of a weight is signiﬁ-
cant relative to the values of other weights; the independent
absolute magnitude of a weight is irrelevant in terms of
preferences.
2.1.1 Deﬁciencies in the method
Although (3) and (4) provide a general, conceptual idea of
what the weights represent in terms of preferences, using
them to set precise values for weights can be difﬁcult. In
fact, a fundamental deﬁciency in the weighted sum method
is that it can be difﬁcult to discern between setting weights to
compensate for differences in objective-function magnitudes


--- Page 5 ---

The weighted sum method for multi-objective optimization
857
and setting weights to indicate the relative importance of an
objective as is done with the rating methods. For practical
purposes, ∂P/∂Fi can be approximated as P/Fi, and
when objective functions have different ranges and orders
of magnitude, an appropriate value for Fi may not be
apparent. For example, consider two objective functions to
be minimized, where function-one is stress, which for the
sake of argument ranges between 10,000 and 40,000 psi,
and function-two is displacement, which ranges between 1
and 2 in. If displacement were to decrease by one unit, the
consequence would be a signiﬁcant improvement; P/F2
would be relatively high. Concurrently, if stress were to
decrease by a unit of one, the consequence would be negligi-
ble; P/F1 would be insigniﬁcant. The result would be a
relatively large value for w2, compared to w1. However, this
result does not necessarily reﬂect the relative importance of
the objectives; the values for the weights have been dictated
purely by the relative magnitudes of the objective functions.
Alternatively, one could consider percentage changes in
the objective functions rather than an absolute change of
unity as discussed above. However, then the question arises
as to what one should consider when evaluating percent-
ages. Should Fi be a percentage of the average value for
Fi, the maximum value for Fi, the minimum value for Fi,
or some factor of the range of values for Fi? The choice is
arbitrary.
Consequently,
one may set the weights to reﬂect
objective-importance directly, but this approach can also
lead to difﬁculties. With the previous example, suppose dis-
placement is twice as important as stress. Considering the
relative value of the weights, if w1 = 1, then w2 = 2.
However, given the relative magnitudes of the objective
functions, stress would still dominate the weighted sum, and
the use of w2 = 2 would be irrelevant. Again, the magni-
tudes of the objective functions affect how the weights are
set, and the articulation of preferences becomes blurred at
best.
This difﬁculty arises because what dictate the solution to
the weighted sum are the relative magnitudes of the terms
wi Fi, in (2), not just the magnitudes of the functions or
weights alone. The value of a weight is signiﬁcant not only
relative to other weights but also relative to its correspond-
ing objective function. This is a critical idea, although it is
often overlooked. With many weighted methods, including
the weighted sum method, preferences are articulated a pri-
ori by using weights to induce the dominance of a particular
term in a formulation (and the objective function associated
with the term). However, the process of selecting weights
and thus indicating preferences is complicated if this dom-
inance is instead, induced by relative function-magnitude.
Thus, when using weights to represent the relative impor-
tance of the objectives, transforming the functions so that
they all have similar magnitudes and do not naturally dom-
inate the aggregate objective function can help one set the
weights to reﬂect preferences more accurately.
As an example demonstrating the signiﬁcance of the rel-
ative values of the weights, consider the following MOO
problem:
Find : x = [x1, x2]T
to minimize
x
: F1 = 20 (x1 −0.75)2 + (2x2 −2)2
F2 = (x1 −2.5)2 + (x2 −1.5)2
(5)
The design space for this problem is shown in Fig. 1, and
the criterion space is shown in Fig. 2.
When F1 is minimized independently, it has a minimum
value of zero, and F2 has a value of 3.3125. When F2 is min-
imized independently, it has a minimum value of zero, and
F1 has a value of 62.25. F1 has a range between zero and
62.25, and F2 has a range between zero and 3.3125. Thus,
the range of values for F1 is much larger than that of F2. If
this problem is solved using the weighted sum method, and
weights are selected with relative values to suggest equal
importance of eth two objectives (i.e. w1 = w2 = 1), then
the solution is x = (0.833, 1.100) and F = (0.179, 2.938).
Yet, even when considered to be equally important, F1 has
a value close to its absolute minimum, and F2 has a value
close to its maximum. If the weights are set to suggest that
F1 is twice as important as F1 (i.e. w1 = 1, w2 = 2), then
the solution is x = (0.909, 1.167) and F = (0.179, 2.938).
Even when one weight is twice as large as the other, the
solution does not change a signiﬁcant amount. However,
when the objective functions are divided by their respective
maxima and thus normalized, then it becomes easy to set the
weights such that they are signiﬁcant relative to each other
and relative to the objective functions values. Then, with the
objective functions normalized such that they both a have a
range between zero and one, if the weights are again set
0
1
2
3
4
-1
0
1
2
3
4
x1
x2
F1
F2
A
D
B
C
Pareto Optimal
Set (Segment BC)
Fig. 1 Example problem design space


--- Page 6 ---

858
R.T. Marler, J.S. Arora
20
40
60
80
100
F1
1
2
3
4
5
6
F2
A
D
C
B
Pareto Optimal
Set (Segment BC)
Fig. 2 Example problem criteria space
such that w1 = w2 = 1, the solution is x = (1.598, 1.412)
and F = (15.054, 0.822).
Further study of (2), (3), and (4) reveals another funda-
mental deﬁciency in the weighted sum method: the weighted
sum utility function is only a linear approximation (in the
criterion space) of the preference function. Equation (2)
is a linear function of the objective functions; it is the
most basic approximation of one’s preference function. The
consequences of this characteristic are explained as fol-
lows. ∂P/∂Fi may actually be a nonlinear function of
the objective functions, changing from point to point in
the criterion space. However, using a weighted sum as
a utility function to approximate the preference function,
inherently assumes that this term is constant, represented
by a scalar weight. Thus, values that are selected for the
weights are only locally relevant. That is, they are not
necessarily appropriate for the complete criterion space,
only for the point at which they are determined, presum-
ably the starting point (initial guess). As the design point
changes with an iterative optimization process, the values
of the objective functions change, and consequently, prefer-
ences (between various points in the criterion space) may
change in a nonlinear fashion. For instance, in the con-
text of the stress-displacement example described above,
minimizing displacement may be more important than min-
imizing stress only until stress reaches a relatively high
value, suggesting potential failure. Then, minimizing stress
becomes more critical, and its associated weighting value
should be increased. Anticipating such a change and altering
weighting values while an optimization problem is running
is impractical. Thus, decision-makers implicitly assume that
∂P/∂Fi is constant, when they determine a set of weights to
reﬂect the relative importance of the objectives. This means
that one assumes that the gradient of the preference function
(in the criterion space) is constant, which is not necessarily
the case. This is why even with a process that enables one to
determine acceptable values for the weights, the ﬁnal solu-
tion to the weighted sum problem may not accurately reﬂect
initial preferences that were supposedly incorporated in the
weights.
It is interesting to note that from a computational per-
spective, nonlinear composite objective functions often help
to ﬁnd Pareto optimal solutions on non-convex Pareto opti-
mal sets more effectively (Messac et al. 2000a, b; Marler
2009). Such functions typically involve various types of
parameters, not just weighting factors. Thus, they provide
a more complex and versatile utility function for altering
preferences.
2.2 Pareto optimal set
In this section and the next, factors that affect the solution
to the weighted sum method are determined. In addition,
fundamental characteristics of the weights are presented
with regard to the Pareto optimal set, whereas the pre-
vious section concerned fundamental characteristics with
respect to preferences. The characteristics discussed here
provide a theoretical foundation for the paired comparison
methods. We point out a fundamental deﬁciency with such
methods for articulating preferences, and we discover that
function transformations can actually be detrimental with
these methods.
Figure 3 depicts a general illustrative model of a Pareto
optimal set in the criterion space, for two objective func-
tions.
The weights represent the gradient of U in (2) with
respect to the vector function F(x), shown as follows:
∇FU =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
∂U
∂F1
∂U
∂F2
⎫
⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎭
=
 w1
w2

(6)
The Pareto optimal solution (for a given set of weights) is
found by determining where the U-contour with the lowest
Z
F1
F2 
Pareto 
Optimal 
Set 
Direction of 
Decreasing 
U-values 
(
U
Δ− 
F
) 
Utility Function Contours 
( )
( )
1
1
2
2
U
w F
w F
=
+
x
x  
Fig. 3 Pareto optimal set in the criterion space


--- Page 7 ---

The weighted sum method for multi-objective optimization
859
possible value intersects the boundary of the feasible crite-
rion space. The U-contours are linear and are thus tangent
to the Pareto optimal curve at the solution point. Changes
in the relative values of the weights result in changes in the
orientation of the U-contours. The subsequent change in the
solution depends on the shape of the Pareto optimal curve in
the criterion space. This has signiﬁcant repercussions when
trying to provide an even spread of Pareto optimal points by
solving a series of weighted sum problems, for a posteriori
articulation of preferences. In fact, some more complicated
methods have been developed so that the shape of the Pareto
optimal hypersurface has a minimal affect the accuracy with
which it is depicted (Marler and Arora 2004).
In terms of higher dimensions (more than two objec-
tive functions), the minimum value of (2) for a ﬁxed set
of weights determines a supporting hyperplane to Z (i.e.
U(F) = constant) (Zadeh 1963; Gembicki 1974), and the
normal of the hyperplane is the vector of weights. The
Pareto optimal hypersurface is always on the boundary of Z,
so the supporting hyperplane is tangent to the hypersurface
at the point that minimizes the weighted sum.
Steuer (1989) uses such a hyperplane to provide an
interpretation of the weights, which we suggest forms the
basis for paired comparison methods. This interpretation
is explained as follows. w1 = 1 is considered a reference
weight, and F1 is the reference function (theoretically, any
function can be used as a reference). Then, i represents the
amount by which Fi must increase in order to compensate
for a decrease (improvement) of 1 in F1, while remaining
on the hyperplane. Each weight is then deﬁned as
wi = lim
i→0
1
i
(7)
If one assumes 1 = 1, then each weight is approximated as
wi ≈1
i
(8)
Thus, wi represents the trade-off between Fi and the ref-
erence function, at the solution point to the weighted sum
problem. This is the idea behind paired comparison methods
for setting weights.
To clarify this idea, note that one can draw the same con-
clusion using Fig. 3 for the case of two objective functions.
Considering that the solution to the weighted sum problem
is always Pareto optimal, the slope of the Pareto optimal
curve in Fig. 3 is determined as follows:
dF2
dF1
= −w1
w2
(9)
The left side of (9) can be approximated as F2/F1. Then,
assuming w1 = 1 is again a reference weight and F1 = 1
(comparable to using 1 = 1 as above), (9) is reduced to
w2 ≈−
1
F2
(10)
There is no negative sign in (8), because the numerator is
assumed to represent a decrease of one.
When using the concepts described above, the objective
functions should not be transformed. This is because using
(7) involves comparing the different objective functions and
evaluating trade-offs (how much of a loss in an objective
is one willing to sacriﬁce for a gain in another objective).
In contrast to the idea of evaluating relative importance,
which was discussed with regard to the rating methods,
assigning values to the weights based on trade-offs can be
hampered by function transformations. Trade-off compar-
isons between functions are easier when the functions retain
their original physical signiﬁcance and original units. How-
ever, most transformation methods yield unitless functions,
the values of which have little or no physical signiﬁcance.
When using the stress-displacement example, one may
be willing to accept an increase in displacement of 0.002 in.
if stress were to reduce by 5,000 psi. If stress is the reference
function, then a decrease (improvement) of 1 psi must cor-
respond to a displacement increase of 5,000 × 0.002 = 10.
Therefore, if the reference weight is w1 = 1, then w2 = 10.
However, if the objectives are transformed or normalized
and thus become unitless, it becomes difﬁcult to conduct
any type of trade-off analysis; it is difﬁcult to conceptualize
what level of increase in normalized displacement one might
accept in exchange for a reduction in normalized stress of
one.
Although (7) is derived based on the mathematical char-
acteristics of (2), it provides another general method for
articulating preferences, and here we point out an inher-
ent deﬁciency in this method. Note that (7) is a relationship
that necessarily exists at the solution point for the weighted
sum. However, a user’s decisions concerning trade-offs
can change depending on the point at which the differ-
ent objective functions are evaluated. One may be forced
to determine trade-offs based on values for the different
functions when the functions are evaluated at a point other
than the solution point to which (7) applies. Therefore, as
with (3) and (4), (7) only provides an approximate means
for incorporating preferences in the weighted sum utility
function a priori.
Figure 3 and (6) provide reinforcement of the conclu-
sions drawn in Section 2.1 concerning the signiﬁcance of
the weights. Note that the direction of the gradient of U
in the criterion space, and thus the orientation of the U-
contours and corresponding solution point, depends on the
relative values (not the absolute values) of the weights. In


--- Page 8 ---

860
R.T. Marler, J.S. Arora
addition, the orientation of the U-contours relative to the
Pareto optimal set also depends on the range of objective-
function values for points in the set. That is, for a given set
of weights (a given gradient vector for the weighted sum),
scaling an objective function changes the Pareto optimal
solution point that the weighted sum method provides. Thus,
as suggested earlier, the value of a weight is signiﬁcant rel-
ative to the values of other weights and relative to the value
of its corresponding objective function.
2.3 Objective functions
Whereas the discussion above considers the signiﬁcance
of weights in terms of the Pareto optimal set, this section
focuses on the relationship between a set of weights and
the objective function values. First, consider a problem with
two unconstrained objective functions:
U = w1F1 (x) + w2F2 (x)
(11)
For U to have a minimum, it is necessary that the gradient
of U be equal to zero, as follows:
∇xU = w1∇xF1 + w2∇xF2 = 0
(12)
Assuming the weights are positive and noting that mini-
mizing a weighted sum always provides a Pareto optimal
solution, (12) indicates that at a Pareto optimal point, the
gradients of the two objective functions are co-linear and
point in opposite directions. Essentially, the linear com-
bination of the gradients equals zero. In compliance with
the deﬁnition of Pareto optimality, this suggests that mov-
ing from a solution that satisﬁes (12), in order to improve a
function, is detrimental to at least one other function.
General constrained problems are considered using
Karush–Kuhn–Tucker necessary conditions, which are sim-
pliﬁed as follows:
k

i=1
wi∇xFi = −
ma

i=1
μi∇xgi
(13)
where ma is the number of active constraints and μi is
the Lagrange multiplier for gi(x). Equation (13) indicates
that a linear combination of the objective function gradi-
ents is equal and opposite to a linear combination of the
constraint gradients (for active constraints), at a Pareto opti-
mal point. If a constraint is active at the solution point for a
weighted sum, which necessarily provides a Pareto optimal
point, then that constraint forms part of the Pareto optimal
set. Equations (12) and (13) suggest that the Pareto opti-
mal point resulting from the use of a speciﬁc set of weights
depends on active constraints that form part of the Pareto
optimal set and on the relationship between the gradients of
the different objective functions.
3 Discussion and conclusions
This paper has provided insight into how the weighted sum
method works and has explored the signiﬁcance of the
weights with respect to preferences, the Pareto optimal set,
and the objective-function values. We have revealed fun-
damental deﬁciencies with respect to preferences, and we
have shown that although the weighted sum method is easy
to use, it provides only a linear approximation of the pref-
erence function. Thus, the solution may not preserve one’s
initial preferences no matter how the weights are set, a cru-
cial idea that is often overlooked. The solution depends on
multiple factors, one of which is the relative magnitude of
the objective functions. However, when setting the weights,
only the relative importance of the objectives should be
considered, not the relative magnitudes of the function val-
ues. In this way, we argue that function-transformation can
be helpful with a priori articulation of preferences, when
the weights are used to represent the relative importance
of the objectives (as with rating methods). This ﬁnding
provides an important guideline that should always be con-
sidered when setting weights and/or transforming objective
functions. Alternatively, we argue that if the weights are
viewed as representing trade-offs between objective func-
tions (as with paired comparison methods), then retaining
the original units of the objectives, without transformation,
is advantageous.
Much of the discussion in this paper pertains to a pri-
ori articulation of preferences, and although some literature
suggests that the weights be set such that k
i=1 wi = 1 and
w ≥0, which results in a convex combination of objective
functions, when using the weighted sum for a priori articula-
tion of preferences, there is no need to place any restriction
on the values of the weights other than w ≥0, which
ensures Pareto optimality. In fact, using unrestricted weights
can be beneﬁcial, making the determination of appropriate
weight values easier. However, when systematically alter-
ing the weights for a posteriori articulation of preferences,
using a convex combination of objective function can help
avoid repeating weighting vectors in terms of relative values
(Marler and Arora 2005). Thus, weights should be treated
differently when used for a priori articulation than they are
when used for a posteriori articulation.
Conclusions based on this work and guidelines for setting
weights are presented as follows:
1)
When setting weights directly for a priori articulation
of preferences, the value of a weight must be sig-
niﬁcant relative to other weights and relative to its
corresponding objective function.
2)
When using a ranking method to set weights, all objec-
tive functions should be transformed such that they have
similar ranges.


--- Page 9 ---

The weighted sum method for multi-objective optimization
861
3)
When using a paired comparison method to set weights
or when viewing the weights as trade-offs, objective
functions should not be transformed/normalized.
4)
When articulating well-understood preferences with
the paired comparison methods, unrestricted positive
weights should be used.
5)
The weighted sum provides only a basic approximation
of one’s preference function. It is fundamentally inca-
pable of incorporating complex preference information.
Thus, even if one determines acceptable values for the
weights a priori, the ﬁnal solution may not accurately
reﬂect initial preferences.
6)
The Pareto optimal solution that results from a speciﬁc
set of weights depends on constraints that form part of
the Pareto optimal set, the relationships between the
gradients of the different objective functions, the rel-
ative magnitudes of the objective functions, and the
shape of the Pareto optimal hypersurface.
7)
The weighted sum method provides a basic and easy-
to-use approach for multi-objective optimization and
is useful as such, but alternate methods should be
considered for the following cases:
a.
Non-convex or potentially non-convex problems
where it is critical to depict the complete Pareto
optimal set thoroughly
b.
When one wishes to depict the Pareto optimal set
for even a convex problem thoroughly, but needs
to minimize computational expenses (minimize the
number of times (1) must be solved)
c.
When it is critical to articulate complex preferences
accurately
References
Athan TW, Papalambros PY (1996) A note on weighted criteria meth-
ods for compromise solutions in multi-objective optimization.
Eng Optim 27:155–176
Chen W, Wiecek MM, Zhang J (1999) Quality utility—a compromise
programming approach to robust design. J Mech Des 121:179–
187
Das I, Dennis JE (1997) A closer look at drawbacks of minimiz-
ing weighted sums of objectives for Pareto set generation in
multicriteria optimization problems. Struct Optim 14:63–69
Das I, Dennis JE (1998) Normal-boundary intersection: a new method
for generating the Pareto surface in nonlinear multicriteria opti-
mization problems. SIAM J Optim 8:631–657
Eckenrode RT (1965) Weighting multiple criteria. Manage Sci 12:180–
192
Gembicki FW (1974) Performance and sensitivity optimization: a
vector index approach. PhD dissertation, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH
Gennert MA, Yuille AL (1988) Determining the optimal weights in
multiple objective function optimization. In: Second international
conference on computer vision (held in Los Alamos, CA), Insti-
tute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Piscataway, NJ, pp
87–89
Geoffrion AM (1968) Proper efﬁciency and the theory of vector
maximization. J Math Anal Appl 22:618–630
Goicoechea A, Hansen DR, Duckstein L (1982) Multiobjective deci-
sion analysis with engineering and business applications. Wiley,
New York
Hobbs BF (1980) A comparison of weighting methods in power plant
siting. Decis Sci 11:725–737
Holtzman JM, Halkin H (1966) Directional convexity and the maxi-
mum principle for discrete systems. SIAM J Control 4:263–275
Huang C-H, Galuski J, Bloebaum CL (2007) Multi-objective Pareto
concurrent subspace optimization for multidisciplinary design.
AIAA J 45:1894–1906
Hwang C-L, Yoon K (1981) Multiple attribute decision making, meth-
ods and applications: a state-of-the-art survey. In: Beckmann M,
Kunzi HP (eds) Lecture notes in economics and mathematical
systems, no 186. Springer, Berlin
Kassaimah SA, Mohamed AM, Kolkailah FA (1995) Bi-criteria opti-
mum design of laminated plates under uniform load and shear.
In: Proceedings of the 27th international SAMPLE technical
conference (held in Albuquerque, NM), 27, pp 731–737
Koski J (1985) Defectiveness of weighting method in multicrite-
rion optimization of structures. Commun Appl Numer Methods
1:333–337
Koski J, Silvennoinen R (1987) Norm methods and partial weighting
in multicriterion optimization of structures. Int J Numer Methods
Eng 24:1101–1121
Lin JG (1975) Three methods for determining Pareto-optimal solu-
tions of multiple-objective problems. In: Ho YC, Mitter SK (eds)
Directions in large-scale systems. Plenum, New York
Marler RT (2009) A study of multi-objective optimization methods for
engineering applications. VDM, Saarbrucken
Marler RT, Arora JS (2004) Survey of multi-objective optimization
methods for engineering. Struct Multidiscipl Optim 26:369–395
Marler RT, Arora JS (2005) Transformation methods for multi-
objective optimization. Eng Optim 37:551–569
Messac A, Mattson CA (2002) Generating well-distributed sets of
Pareto points for engineering design using physical programming.
Eng Optim 3:431–450
Messac A, Sukam CP, Melachrinoudis E (2000a) Aggregate objective
functions and Pareto frontiers: required relationships and practical
implications. Optim Eng 1:171–188
Messac A, Sundararaj GJ, Tappeta RV, Renaud JE (2000b) Ability
of objective functions to generate points on nonconvex Pareto
frontiers. AIAA J 38(6):1084–1091
Messac A, Ismail-Yahaya A, Mattson CA (2003) The normalized nor-
mal constraint method for generating the Pareto frontier. Struct
Multidiscipl Optim 25:86–98
Miettinen K (1999) Nonlinear multiobjective optimization. Kluwer
Academic, Boston
Proos KA, Steven GP, Querin OM, Xie YM (2001) Multicriterion
evolutionary structural optimization using the weighted and the
global criterion methods. AIAA J 39:2006–2012
Rao JR, Roy N (1989) Fuzzy set theoretic approach of assigning
weights to objectives in multicriteria decision making. Int J Syst
Sci 20:1381–1386
Saaty TL (1977) A scaling method for priorities in hierarchies, multi-
ple objectives and fuzzy sets. J Math Psychol 15:234–281
Saaty TL (2003) Decision-making with the AHP: why is the principal
eigenvalue necessary. Eur J Oper Res 145:85–91
Saaty TL, Hu G (1998) Ranking by eigenvector versus other methods
in the analytic hierarchy process. Appl Math Lett 11:121–125
Saramago SFP, Steffen V Jr (1998) Optimization of the trajectory plan-
ning of robot manipulators taking into account the dynamics of
the system. Mech Mach Theory 33:883–894
Stadler W (1995) Caveats and boons of multicriteria optimization.
Microcomput Civ Eng 10:291–299


--- Page 10 ---

862
R.T. Marler, J.S. Arora
Stadler W, Dauer JP (1992) Multicriteria optimization in engineering:
a tutorial and survey. In: Kamat MP (ed) Structural optimiza-
tion: status and promise. American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Washington, DC
Steuer RE (1989) Multiple criteria optimization: theory, computation,
and application. Krieger, Malabar
Tappeta RV, Renaud JE, Messac E, Sundararaj GJ (2000) Interactive
physical programming: tradeoff analysis and decision making in
multicriteria optimization. AIAA J 38:917–926
Voogd H (1983) Multicriteria evaluation for urban and regional plan-
ning. Pion, London
Yoon KP, Hwang C-L (1995) Multiple attribute decision making, an
introduction. Sage, London
Zadeh LA (1963) Optimality and non-scalar-valued performance crite-
ria. IEEE Trans Automat Contr AC-8:59–60
Zhang K-S, Han Z-H, Li W-J, Song W-P (2008) Bilevel adaptive
weighted sum method for multidisciplinary multi-objective opti-
mization. AIAA J 46:2611–2622