--- Page 1 ---

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Stability effects of mutations and protein evolvability
Nobuhiko Tokuriki1 and Dan S Tawﬁk
The past several years have seen novel insights at the interface
of protein biophysics and evolution. The accepted paradigm
that proteins can tolerate nearly any amino acid substitution
has been replaced by the view that the deleterious effects of
mutations, and especially their tendency to undermine the
thermodynamic and kinetic stability of protein, is a major
constraint on protein evolvability—the ability of proteins to
acquire changes in sequence and function. We summarize
recent ﬁndings regarding how mutations affect protein stability,
and how stability affects protein evolution. We describe ways of
predicting and analyzing stability effects of mutations, and
mechanisms that buffer or compensate for these destabilizing
effects and thereby promote protein evolvabilty, in nature and
in the laboratory.
Addresses
Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot 76100, Israel
Corresponding author: Tawﬁk, Dan S (tawﬁk@weizmann.ac.il)
1 Department of Chemisty, University of Cambridge, Lensﬁeld,
Cambridge, CB2 1EW, UK.
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2009, 19:596–604
This review comes from a themed issue on
Biophysical methods
Edited by Keith Moffat and Andreas Engel
Available online 16th September 2009
0959-440X/$ – see front matter
# 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI 10.1016/j.sbi.2009.08.003
Introduction
Untilrecently,theprevailingviewamongproteinscientists
has been that most positions can tolerate drastic sequence
changes while the protein retains its ability to fold (con-
ﬁgurational stability) and function [1,2]. An exception
was the hypothesis that mutations that endow enzymes
new functions trade off with stability and hence introduce
the need for compensatory mutations [3]. However, even
this hypothesis assumed that stability is associated with
activity changes, rather than a global, general constraint.
Two papers in 2005 highlighted the overall importance of
stability effects of mutations to protein evolution [1,4].
These were followed by a series of works that explored this
link further and led to a new interface between protein
biophysics and molecular evolution.
Mutations are an essential ‘raw material’ of evolution.
However, selection to maintain the existing structure
and function (negative, purifying selection) purges many,
if not most protein mutations, thus reducing the potential
for future adaptations. Thus, only a fraction of all possible
mutations will be ﬁxed under positive selection to adopt a
new function. Neutral mutations can also stochastically ﬁx
owing to random, or ‘neutral drift’, in small populations. At
the organismal levels, the effects of mutations on ﬁtness
(reproduction rates) are complex and rarely correlate with
the properties of one gene/protein. Redundancy, backup,
and robustness, at different levels mask the effects of many
mutations [5]. Indeed, understanding and predicting the
effects of mutations on the organismal level is a major
challenge of evolutionary biology [1,6,7]. However, by
the most simplistic model, ‘protein ﬁtness’ (W) can be
deﬁned, for example, as the ﬂux of an enzyme catalyzed
reaction, and W then correlates with the viability or ﬁtness
of the organism in which this enzyme functions (for
examples see [2,4,8,9]). The ﬂux is proportional to the
concentration of functional protein ([E]0) and its function
(kcat, or kcat/KM for an enzyme, or Kd in a case of a receptor;
such factors are uniﬁed here under the symbol f):
W ¼ ½E0  f
(1)
The concentration of functional protein ([E]0) relates to
protein stability. As indicated by the analysis of patho-
genic mutations, the deleterious effects of 80% of
mutations stem from their effects on stability and folding
[10]. Mutations that are destabilizing beyond a certain
level (or DDG value) cause protein disfunctionalization
by reducing the levels of soluble, function proteins
[10,11,12]. Experimental measurements in several
different proteins indicate that the likelihood of mutation
to be deleterious is in the order of 33–40% [2,7,13] (36%,
on average). Hence, as mutations accumulate, protein
ﬁtness declines exponentially [2]:
W  e0:36n
(2)
(where n is the average number of mutations) or even
more than exponentially (see section on ‘epistatic effects’).
So by the time an average protein accumulates, on aver-
age, ﬁve mutations, its ﬁtness will decline to <20%. Thus,
although the initial stability of a protein can buffer some
of the destabilizing effects of mutations (Figure 1a),
stability appears to comprise the main factor (although
clearly not the only one [6]) that dictates the rate of
protein evolution [1,4], and possibly of whole organ-
isms [14,15,16], in particular, but not only, in relation to
the acquisition of new functions.
Here, we discuss new developments regarding the pre-
diction and analysis of stability effects of mutations.
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2009, 19:596–604
www.sciencedirect.com


--- Page 2 ---

We then describe how stability affects protein evolution,
under neutral and adaptive scenarios. We also point out
mechanisms that mediate tolerance, or robustness to
mutations, and thereby affect the evolvability of proteins,
both in nature and in the laboratory.
Predicting the stability effects of mutations
The deﬁnition of stability (DG) as used in various evol-
utionary models [1,2,4], and this text is no exception,
is vague. Thermodynamic stability (DGUN: the free
energy difference between the unfolded and native state)
is a reasonable measure only for relatively small proteins.
It certainly does not reﬂect protein stability within cel-
lular environments. Kinetic stability that relates to the
energy levels of folding intermediates between U and N
states, and/or mis-folded forms, and whether these can
lead to aggregation or degradation, is also a crucial factor,
in particular in complex, slow folding proteins [17].
Experimental datasets usually relate to changes in
thermodynamic stability of mutations (DDGUN values),
and are available for only a small set of proteins. Recent
advances in computation enable the prediction of DDG
values of mutations in a wide range of proteins. Some
prediction methods are based on sequence [18–20], others
on 3D structures [21–24]. The combination of both has
also been explored [19,25,26,27]. The predictions largely
relate to the effects of mutations on the native state, and
do not address effects on folding intermediates. Although
the effects on folding in vivo may largely overlap with
thermodynamic stability effects [28,29], predictions of
kinetic stability effects would be highly valuable. Overall,
more accurate and realistic predictions of the effects of
Stability effects of mutations and protein evolvability Tokuriki and Tawfik
597
Figure 1
Evolutionary changes and the accompanying changes in protein stability and fitness (plotted in the style of Reference [1]). (a) Proteins evolve, that is,
acquire mutations, within a ‘neutral’ range of stability that maintains their fitness (levels of soluble, functional enzyme, for example, blue zone). Non-
synonymous mutations are represented as arrows. Mutations that do not alter the stability beyond the neutral zone can be accommodated as neutral
(black arrows). However, about a third of mutations are destabilizing (red arrows) and may reduce stability to an extent that comprises fitness (lower
orange zone). Such mutations are usually purged by purifying or negative selection. Rarely, a mutation may increase stability beyond the neutral zone,
and might be purged according to their deleterious effects on protein dynamics or regulation. (b) New-function mutations tend to be destabilizing (red
arrows), and compensatory stabilizing mutations (blue arrow) that are subsequently acquired play an important role in restoring stability and fitness
(uphill divergence). (c) Downhill divergence: incorporation of compensatory mutations (e.g. consensus/ancestor mutations) before, or in parallel with,
the divergence of new function can greatly enhance the rate of evolution, or evolvability. (d) Buffering the destabilizing mutations by chaperones also
increases evolvability, by extending the neutral zone of stability.
www.sciencedirect.com
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2009, 19:596–604


--- Page 3 ---

mutations that may relate to protein levels in vivo remain
a challenge [30].
Although prediction accuracy is currently limited, and the
methods are biased toward the training sets and thermo-
dynamic stability, they still enable to examine general
trends related to the way DDG values for mutations are
distributed (see note added in proof). For example, FoldX
has been applied to predict the DDG distributions for all
possible mutations in a set of proteins [31]. It was found
that the distributions of DDG values for mesophylic
proteins from various organisms excluding viruses are
strikingly similar despite a range of sizes (50–330 amino
acids) and folds (Figure 2). The distributions are asymme-
trical, and correlate with an overlay of two Gaussian func-
tions: Surface residues gave one narrow Gaussian with a
low destabilizing mean (DDG 0.6 kcal/mol), whereas
core residues gave a wider distribution with a stronger
destabilizing mean (1.4 kcal/mol). Overall, about 50%
of mutations are destabilizing (DDG > 1 kcal/mol), and
>15% of mutations are highly destabilizing (>3 kcal/
mol). About 5% of mutations show stabilizing values
(DDG < 1 kcal/mol) in both the experimental and com-
puted DDG distributions. However, part of this already
small fraction relates to mutations in catalytic residues that
tend to increase stability [32,33] but result in inactive
protein. The computed distributions show remarkable
resemblance to distributions of a large dataset of exper-
imental DDG values [14,31], and those computed for
model lattice proteins [4,34]. The DDG distributions
indicate that the ﬂux of destabilizing mutations is much
larger (>20-fold) than those of stabilizing mutations, and
may explain why throughout evolution, the stability of
proteins remained marginally low (DGUN 3–10 kcal/mol),
probably at the minimal levels needed to maintain func-
tional protein levels within living cells [14,15]. Other
driving forces that may have prevented the evolution of
higher stability might be the hampering of protein regu-
lation or activity by excess stability [1].
The relationships between stability and
protein ﬁtness
How is protein ﬁtness, or levels of activity conferred by a
given protein ([E]0
.f), affected by mutations? Proteins
possess a certain margin of stability (DG) that ensures a
sufﬁciently high level of folded, functional protein. [E]0 is
therefore proportional to the fraction of folded protein
that in turn, is dictated by DG:
W / ½E0 ¼ 1  1=ðeDG=RT þ 1Þ
(3)
Eq. (3) is sigmoidal with a mid point (fraction of
folded protein = 0.5) at DG = 0. Even modest stability,
3 kcal/mol, gives >99% of folded molecules, and many
proteins exhibit DGUN values within the range of several
kcal/mol. However, various partially folded and mis-
folded states lead to aggregation or degradation. Since
the latter processes are irreversible, even a minuscule
fraction of these states will drag the equilibrium away
from the folded, functional state. Thus, DG values lower
than 3 kcal/mol might be required, in addition to the
prevention of problematic folding intermediates [17].
598
Biophysical methods
Figure 2
The universal distribution of stability effects of mutations [31]. DDG values are presented in histograms using 1 kcal/mol bins. (a) The predicted DDG
values by FoldX for all possible mutations in many proteins (shown are few characteristic examples), and the experimentally measured DDG values for
1285 mutations, all give similar asymmetric distributions with larger destabilizing shoulders (DDG > 0). (b) Separated DDG distributions of core and
surface residues. Residues were divided according to their accessible surface area (ASA) values, and the DDG values for all possible mutations were
arranged in histograms and fitted to a single Gaussian.
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2009, 19:596–604
www.sciencedirect.com


--- Page 4 ---

Because most mutations affect stability and not function,
protein levels, or ﬁtness, could be correlated with the
stability effects of mutations by a simple model, dubbed
the threshold model. The sigmoidal nature of (3)
indicates that [E]0, and thus protein ﬁtness, remain
unchanged as long as stability remains above a certain
threshold (DGt; Figure 3a). However, as more mutations
accumulate, DG becomes lower than DGt, and [E]0
thereby decreases [2]. The correlation between the
initial thermodynamic stability of a protein and its ﬁtness
decline in response to mutations was experimentally
validated using a distribution of DDG values similar to
the one described in Figure 2 [4]. The threshold model
seems to be valid for many proteins, and the analysis of
mutations (SNPs) leading to monogenic diseases revealed
that the relationship between the destabilizing effects of
mutations and the severity of disease shows sigmoidal
relationships [10,12]. The relationship between the
soluble expression level of different HypF-N and p53
variants in E. coli, and DGUN of these variants showed the
same tendency [28,35]. Interestingly, the stability margin
that could be compromised with no immediate ﬁtness
effect (DGt) seems to be 1–3 kcal/mol for most proteins,
almost regardless of their initial stability (DGUN)
[2,10,12,28,35,36]. It appears that stability losses of
little kcal/mol result in a sufﬁciently large fraction of
partially folded, and/or mis-folded species that lead to
signiﬁcant loss of protein levels via irreversible aggrega-
tion or degradation.
The threshold model and epistatic effects
Interactions between mutations are being studied by a
number of disciplines, although the nomenclature differs.
Geneticists and evolutionists term such interactions as
epistasis, while protein biophysicists use the term non-
additivity (e.g. in double mutant cycles). By the threshold
model, negative epistasis, whereby the combined effects of
mutations are larger than expected from their individual
effects, is expected: the ﬁrst mutations have relatively
small effects on ﬁtness, but as more mutations accumu-
late, ﬁtness rapidly declines. This prediction contradicts
double mutant cycles showing that the stability effects of
mutations (DDG values) are largely additive [37], or less-
than-additive in cases of interacting residues [38], corre-
sponding with the effect of no, or even positive epistasis.
How can this dichotomy be reconciled? The threshold
induces a delay in ﬁtness decline in the face of mutations
as the loss of stability induced by mutations is buffered by
the excess of stability. However, the accumulation of
more mutations reduces the stability beyond the allowed
margin, leading to ﬁtness decline in parallel with DG
changes. Negative epistasis was experimentally observed
for the decline of ﬁtness upon mutation accumulation
[2]. Further, a larger excess of stability obviously enables
a larger number of destabilizing mutations to be accom-
modated while retaining protein ﬁtness. For example,
a
stabilized
variant
of
TEM-1-lactamase
(TEM-1-
Met182Thr) showed higher tolerance to mutations
than the wild-type enzyme [4]. However, this higher
Stability effects of mutations and protein evolvability Tokuriki and Tawfik
599
Figure 3
The threshold and gradient robustness models [62]. (a) Threshold robustness: The sigmoidal nature of Eq. (3) indicates that protein fitness (or
functional expression level [E]0) remain largely unaffected as long as protein stability (DG) remains above a certain threshold (DGt; blue line). Increasing
the stability threshold results in higher tolerance to mutations, or neutrality (red line). However, accumulating mutations do reduce stability, and once
the margin is exhausted, mutations result in rapid loss of fitness. Further, owing to the structural features that mediate higher stability, and the inherent
relationship between robustness and epistasis [2], higher thresholds lead to higher average DDG values per mutation, and steeper fitness declines
(red line). (b) Gradient robustness: Loosely packed and partially disordered proteins may be characterized by very low initial stability (low DGt), but also
by lower destabilizing effects of mutations, resulting in the mode represented by the green line. Gradient robustness is associated with loosely packed
structures, and may have emerged under high mutational loads, for example, in RNA viral proteins.
www.sciencedirect.com
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2009, 19:596–604


--- Page 5 ---

neutrality, or robustness, resulted in a higher degree of
negative epistasis [2].
In adaptive evolution (the acquisition of new protein
functions), more complicated epistatic effects such as
sign epistasis, can be observed [39]. For example, a severe
reduction in [E]0 could cancel out improvements in
function ( f) [36], and stabilizing mutations increase
ﬁtness only if stability is close to the threshold but not
above it (see section on compensatory mutations). These
effects dictate the trajectories of protein evolution
[40,41], and make evolution a far more complex and
interesting phenomenon.
Stability margins and environmental
robustness
The higher stability is above DGt (higher negative DG
values), the higher is the protein’s tolerance to mutations,
or neutrality (genetic robustness is another oft-used term)
[4,42,43,44]. However, if higher DG values are not
favored by natural selection because their sacriﬁce has
no immediate effect on protein ﬁtness (as indicated by
the negative epistasis effects), how did they emerge in the
ﬁrst instance, and how were they maintained under a
constant input of destabilizing mutations? One expla-
nation is that genetic robustness evolved in response to
environmental pressures. Fluctuations in temperature,
salinity, redox potential, and similar factors, may have
led the evolution of higher stability [5,45]. Another
key factor arises from errors occurring during protein
synthesis (phenotypic mutations) [46,47,48]. Phenoty-
pic mutations are about 105 more frequent than genetic
mutations, but are non-heritable, and are therefore classi-
ﬁed as environmental perturbations. Because of their very
high rates, it has been suggested that transcriptional and
translational errors can severely limit the rate of protein
evolution [46,47]. It could therefore be that stability
thresholds evolved to buffer the effects of phenotypic
mutations and other environmental factors, rather than
genetic mutations. Indeed, an experiment based on error-
prone transcription of TEM-1-lactamase indicated that an
increase of 20-fold in the frequency of phenotypic
mutations promoted the rapid evolution of more stable
enzyme variants [48]. The evolved variants exhibited
higher ﬁtness under an increased rate of phenotypic
mutations, but showed no advantage over wild-type
TEM-1 under normal transcription. These variants car-
ried previously identiﬁed stabilizing mutations such as
Met182Thr that also endow TEM-1 with increased tol-
erance to genetic mutations [4,49]. Thus, although
phenotypic mutations are not individually subjected to
inheritance and natural selection, they collectively exert a
direct and immediate effect on protein ﬁtness. Protein
synthesis errors, and other environmental perturbations
therefore play an important role in shaping protein
stability thresholds, and in increasing protein robustness
to genetic mutations.
Stability and new functions
The destabilizing effects of mutations also limit the
acquisition of new protein functions. Following the obser-
vation that mutations that improved the catalytic efﬁ-
ciency of TEM-1-lactamase toward third generation
antibiotics were destabilizing, it has been suggested that
the evolution of new-function and protein stability trade-
off [3]. Conversely, following changes in function,
compensatory mutations that restore stability are often
observed [3] (see section below). However, this notion
has not been systematically explored, especially in view
of the notion that, as indicated by DDG distributions,
mutations are, on average, destabilizing. Recently, FoldX
predictions of 246 new-function mutations observed in
the directed evolution of 22 different enzymes indicated
that although new-function mutations are destabilizing
(average DDG = 0.9 kcal/mol), they are not more destabi-
lizing than the average mutation. However, new function,
or adaptive mutations were found to be more destabiliz-
ing, and tend to occur at more buried residues, than
neutral mutations that characterize non-adaptive, or neu-
tral mutational drifts [50]. Thus, the accumulation of
multiple new-function mutations is indeed likely to bri-
ng protein stability below DGt, decrease [E]0, and possibly
decrease protein ﬁtness, even if these mutations improve
function. Indeed, stabilized variants of P450 and TEM-1
showed higher evolvability through their ability to accom-
modate a larger variety of new-function mutations with-
out loss of enzyme levels [49,51].
Compensatory stabilizing mutations—uphill
divergence
Compensatory mutations, also called global suppressors
owing to their ability to suppress the deleterious effects of
a wide range of mutations, have been observed in natural
[3,41] and in vitro evolution [50], and therefore play a
key role in evolutionary dynamics [52]. As most deleter-
ious mutations are destabilizing, most compensatory
mutations appear to be stabilizing. For example, in the
evolution of resistance to the antibiotic cefotaxime in
TEM-1 in the clinic, and by laboratory evolution, active-
site mutations that endowed the new function were
followed by the stabilizing compensatory mutation
Met182Thr [3]. The need for compensatory mutations
that restore the stability margin of the evolving protein
severely restricts the evolutionary trajectory and slows
down the rate of adaptation [3,40]. Such trajectories
can therefore be dubbed uphill divergence (Figure 1b).
Notably, via these uphill trajectories, function-altering
mutations that are destabilizing beyond DGt cannot ﬁxate,
unless they are buffered by chaperones as discussed
below.
Stabilizing ancestor/consensus mutations
and downhill divergence
An obvious way of expediting the rate of evolution is to
have a starting point with higher DGt and let it diverge
600
Biophysical methods
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2009, 19:596–604
www.sciencedirect.com


--- Page 6 ---

downhill by exploiting this excess of stability (Figure 1c).
In the laboratory, downhill divergence was demonstrated
with a variant of P450 that was evolved ﬁrst for higher
thermostability, and demonstrating its higher evolvabilty
through its ability to accept destabilizing new-function
mutations that the wild-type enzyme would not [51].
There are straightforward ways of improving thermodyn-
amic stability [53–55]. In fact, the use of thermophilic
proteins as starting points for protein engineering has
long been a favorite strategy for protein engineering.
However, not every stabilizing mutation acts as global
suppressor, and the engineering of a highly thermostable
starting point comprises an extra step. Further, a large
excess of stability may reduce evolvability, for example
by rigidifying the protein and restricting alternative
conformations that mediate the new function. A more
attractive way of downhill divergence would be to incorp-
orate compensatory mutations into the library that is
selected for the new-function. However, this strategy
depends on being able to predict stabilizing compensa-
tory mutations.
A hint regarding the nature of compensatory mutations
came from a ‘neutral drift’ experiment, that is, repeated
rounds of mutagenesis and purifying selection to maintain
the enzyme’s function. Under the high mutational load
applied in this experiment, the enrichment of several
different mutations was observed. Five of those that
showed the highest enrichment were found to increase
stability (either kinetic or thermodynamic) and act as
global suppressors for a whole range of destabilizing
mutations. The enriched mutations had a common fea-
ture: they brought the sequence of TEM-1 closer to its
family consensus, and/or its ancestor [49]. Mutations in
conserved residues usually cause large stability decreases.
Conversely, reverting residues that deviate from the
consensus amino acid can increase stability [56], and is
often used for engineering higher stability [57]. The
predicted ancestor of a given family largely overlaps
the consensus derived from aligning sequence homologs
(that anyway tend to be members of the same family). But
there are fundamental differences. Resurrected ancestors
have been shown to exhibit higher stability [58], and at
some positions, the ancestor residue confers higher
stability than the consensus [59]. Further, the consensus
is an indistinct statistical feature that strongly depends on
which sequences are included, whereas inferred ancestors
are clearly deﬁned per a given node and phylogeny.
Overall, it appears that ancestral inference, and/or con-
sensus analysis, comprise powerful ways of predicting
compensatory mutations that can be ‘spiked’ into libraries
and facilitate the evolution of stable proteins [60], and of
new functions via downhill divergence. Putting aside the
biases underlining ancestral predictions [61], it can also be
argued that the ancestors may have exhibited higher
stability and evolvability, and thus diverged downhill
to yield the marginally stable proteins we see today.
Gradient robustness
High stability is associated with well-packed, highly
compact structures in which residues are extensively
interconnected. In such structures, however, mutations
lead to high stability losses due to the loss of a relatively
high number of strong contacts. Indeed, the higher the
stability threshold, the higher is the initial robustness to
mutations, and the higher the negative epistatic effect,
namely, the steep ﬁtness decline that follows [2]. How-
ever, besides threshold robustness, a different mode of
robustness seems to exist—gradient robustness [62].
Gradient robustness correlates with little, or no initial
stability margin, but with a milder slope whereby the
average stability loss per mutation is reduced (Figure 3b).
In poorly packed, or partially disordered proteins where,
on average, residue makes relatively few contacts,
mutations are expected to exhibit lower DDG values.
Viral proteins, and RNA viral proteins, in particular, seem
to comprise an example for this mode of robustness
whereby, those who have little interactions, have little
to lose. Indeed, RNA viruses are exposed to high
mutation rates (103 to 105) compared to other organ-
isms (109). Consequently, their proteins seem to show
particularly low stability [16], and an overall tendency to
be loosely packed and partially disordered, and their
distributions of DDG of mutations appear to be less
destabilizing [62].
Chaperones buffering and protein evolvability
What other means are there to overcome stability con-
strains and accelerate protein evolution? Chaperones, also
known as heat shock proteins, assist the folding of other
proteins, and buffer various effects of mutations [63].
However, the buffering mechanisms vary from one organ-
ism, and chaperone, to another, and are under dispute.
What fraction of mutations can be buffered by chaper-
ones, to what extent (or DDG values), and what would be
the impact on evolutionary rates, has also been unknown.
We recently established an experimental system aimed at
systematically measuring the buffering capacity of the
bacterial chaperonin GroEL/ES. Neutral drifts (i.e.
mutation-accumulation experiments where selection is
applied to maintain the enzyme’s expression levels and
function)
were
performed
under
overexpression
of
GroEL/ES, and the drifting mutants were tested for
the level of buffering and mutational content [36].
The results indicate that GroEL/ES overexpression
doubled the number of mutations that could accumulate
as neutral, and greatly increased their variability. More
mutations in protein cores were observed, and mutations
with much higher destabilizing effects: >3.5 kcal/mol
higher DDG values, on average, versus 1 kcal/mol in
the absence of GroEL/ES. Thus, GroEL/ES seems to
signiﬁcantly extend the zone of neutrality and enable
many
more
destabilizing
mutations
to
accumulate
(Figure 1d). In accordance, the acquisition of a new
enzymatic speciﬁcity was also expedited under GroEL/
Stability effects of mutations and protein evolvability Tokuriki and Tawfik
601
www.sciencedirect.com
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2009, 19:596–604


--- Page 7 ---

ES overexpression: 2-fold more improved variants were
observed, and the improvements in the evolving activity
were 10-fold higher than in variants evolved without
GroEL/ES. A typical case was observed whereby variants
of an enzyme selected under GroEL/ES overexpression
carried a mutation that induced large improvements in
the newly evolving activity, but was severely destabiliz-
ing and led to aggregation (Phe306Leu, in an enzyme
dubbed PTE). Variants selected without GroEL/ES over-
expression carried another mutation (Phe306Cys) that
showed milder improvements and no destabilizing
effects. In fact, in the absence of chaperonin overexpres-
sion, although carrying mutations that improved function
kcat/KM for the evolved ester substrate), many variants
showed no improved enzymatic activity (ﬁtness, W), or
even decreased activity, due to much reduced enzyme
levels ([E]0) [36].
Concluding remarks
Mutations, and mutations that alter protein function
(new-function mutations), in particular, are generally
destabilizing, and can reduce protein and organismal
ﬁtness. The destabilizing effects of mutations comprise
a major constraint for protein evolution, be it the accumu-
lation of neutral, or adaptive variation. Two models by
which protein ﬁtness declines in response to mutations
are currently described: (i) threshold robustness (an
excess of stability that buffers the destabilizing effects
of mutations) associated with well-packed, highly stable
proteins; (ii) gradient robustness—reduced DDG values of
mutations due to loosely packed, partially disordered
structures, which might be common in proteins exposed
to high mutational loads (e.g. RNA viral proteins).
Whereas threshold robustness has been extensively stu-
died, gradient robustness needs to be further examined.
In general, more comprehensive understanding of how
mutations affect protein ﬁtness within living cells is
needed, including their combined effects on function,
thermodynamic and kinetic stability, and clearance
through aggregation and degradation. Mechanisms for
compensating and buffering the destabilizing effects of
mutations also play a crucial role in evolution, both in the
laboratory and in nature. These include compensatory
ancestor/consensus
mutations
and
other
stabilizing
mutations, chaperones, and additional mechanisms that
are likely to be discovered in the future.
Other questions remain open, such as what role did com-
pensatory/stabilizing mutation and chaperone buffering
play in natural evolution? Do certain traits trade off, such
as high stability and evolvability, or neutrality (minimal
effects of mutations) and evolvability (the ability of few
mutations to induce large changes of function and struc-
ture)? Can these trade-offs be circumvented, and how?
Better understanding of these issues can improve our
ability to engineer and evolve new proteins in the labora-
tory [64], and explain how, in nature, from few primordial
progenitors, such a magniﬁcent variety of proteins with
different structures and functions had diverged (for further
discussion of these issues see Reference [65]).
Note added in proof
A recent paper provides a long-needed objective com-
parison of six commonly used stability prediction algor-
ithms for mutations with the experimental dataset
(Potapov V, Cohen M, Schreiber G: Assessing compu-
tational methods for predicting protein stability upon
mutation: good on average but not in the details. Protein
Eng Des Sel 22:553-60. The results indicate a considerable
and similar level of inaccuracy for all these algorithms in
predicting DDG values for individual mutations, and
combining them did not signiﬁcantly improve the pre-
diction accuracy for individual mutations. In contrast, the
overall trends predicted by these methods for large sets of
mutations are remarkably close and accurate.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial support by the EU BioModularH2 and
MiFEM networks, and by the Israel Science Foundation. We thank Shimon
Bershtein and other members of our laboratory for fruitful discussions.
References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review,
have been highlighted as:

of special interest
 of outstanding interest
1.

DePristo MA, Weinreich DM, Hartl DL: Missense meanderings in
sequence space: a biophysical view of protein evolution. Nat
Rev Genet 2005, 6:678-687.
A key hypothesis that linked a biophysical view of proteins, and stability
effects of mutations in particular, with the rate and trajectories of protein
evolution.
2.

Bershtein S, Segal M, Bekerman R, Tokuriki N, Tawﬁk DS:
Robustness-epistasis link shapes the ﬁtness landscape of a
randomly drifting protein. Nature 2006, 444:929-932.
In contrast to the stability effects (DDG values) of mutations that are
largely additive, accumulating deleterious mutations were found to show
negative epistatic effects (more-than-exponential ﬁtness declines),
thereby rendering proteins more resistive to mutations than generally
assumed. The ﬁnding prompted a model by which mutational robustness
(or neutrality) is due to a stability margin or threshold that buffers the
deleterious stability effects of mutations on ﬁtness. However, once the
stability threshold is exhausted, ﬁtness declines rapidly, thus giving rise to
the negative epistasis effects.
3.

Wang X, Minasov G, Shoichet BK: Evolution of an antibiotic
resistance enzyme constrained by stability and activity trade-
offs. J Mol Biol 2002, 320:85-95.
Seven mutations seen in TEM-1 b-lactamase variants that evolved in the
clinic toward the degradation of the third generation antibiotic cefotaxime
were found to be destabilizing. Met182Thr, which is frequently found in
the clinical isolates, was shown to compensate the destabilizing effects of
these new-function mutations. These results prompted the hypothesis of
trade-off between new-function and stability, and highlighted the impor-
tance of compensating stabilizing mutations in adaptive trajectories.
4.

Bloom JD, Silberg JJ, Wilke CO, Drummond DA, Adami C,
Arnold FH: Thermodynamic prediction of protein neutrality.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:606-611.
The experiment measured how protein ﬁtness correlates with stability
changes following the accumulation of mutations, and correlated these
changes with a computed distribution of DDG effects. A stabilized variant
(Met182Thr TEM-1) was shown to exhibit higher tolerance, and a model
that followed previous theoretical predictions [43] was developed that
linked the thermodynamic stability of a protein with its mutational robust-
ness (or neutrality) was proposed.
602
Biophysical methods
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2009, 19:596–604
www.sciencedirect.com


--- Page 8 ---

5.
Wagner A: Robustness and Evolvability in Living Systems.
Princeton University Press; 2005.
6.
Pal C, Papp B, Lercher MJ: An integrated view of protein
evolution. Nat Rev Genet 2006, 7:337-348.
7.
Camps M, Herman A, Loh E, Loeb LA: Genetic constraints on
protein evolution. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 2007, 42:313-326.
8.
Zhu G, Golding GB, Dean AM: The selective cause of an ancient
adaptation. Science 2005, 307:1279-1282.
9.
Miller SP, Lunzer M, Dean AM: Direct demonstration of an
adaptive constraint. Science 2006, 314:458-461.
10.

Yue P, Li Z, Moult J: Loss of protein structure stability as a
major causative factor in monogenic disease. J Mol Biol 2005,
353:459-473.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of monogenic disease provide a
unique dataset of thousands of mutations with known ﬁtness effects in
vivo. Analysis of SNPs indicated that 80% of pathogenic mutations in
human proteins result from loss of stability and that the majority of
disease mutations affect protein stability by as little as 1–3 kcal/mol.
This result is in agreement with in vitro measurements of ﬁtness losses,
and the threshold model, by which, once the margin of stability is
compromised, mutations cause immediate ﬁtness losses [2,4].
11.
Reumers J: SNPeffect: a database mapping molecular
phenotypic effects of human non-synonymous coding SNPs.
Nucleic Acids Res 2004, 33:D527-D532.
12.
Randles LG, Lappalainen I, Fowler SB, Moore B, Hamill SJ,
Clarke J: Using model proteins to quantify the effects of
pathogenic mutations in Ig-like proteins. J Biol Chem 2006,
281:24216-24226.
13.
Smith B, Raines R: Genetic selection for critical residues in
ribonucleases. J Mol Biol 2006, 362:459-478.
14.

Zeldovich KB, Chen P, Shakhnovich EI: Protein stability imposes
limits on organism complexity and speed of molecular
evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104:16152-16157.
A theoretical analysis connecting the destabilizing effects of protein
mutations with the overall rates of evolution of organisms. The underlining
conclusion being that protein stability is the major factor limiting genetic
diversity and evolutionary rates.
15.
Chen P, Shakhnovich EI: Lethal mutagenesis in viruses and
bacteria. Genetics, Available as doi:10.1534/
genetics.109.106492.
16.
Chen P, Shakhnovich EI: Thermal adaptation in virus and
bacteria. Available as arXiv:0906.0390, submitted for publication.
17.
Watters AL, Deka P, Corrent C, Callender D, Varani G, Sosnick T,
Baker D: The highly cooperative folding of small naturally
occurring proteins is likely the result of natural selection. Cell
2007, 128:613-624.
18.
Capriotti E, Fariselli P, Calabrese R, Casadio R: Predicting protein
stability changes from sequences using support vector
machines. Bioinformatics 2005, 21(Suppl 2):ii54-ii58.
19.
Cheng J, Randall A, Baldi P: Prediction of protein stability
changes for single-site mutations using support vector
machines. Proteins 2006, 62:1125-1132.
20.
Huang LT, Gromiha MM, Ho SY: iPTREE-STAB: interpretable
decision tree based method for predicting protein
stability changes upon mutations. Bioinformatics 2007,
23:1292-1293.
21.
Gilis D, Rooman M: PoPMuSiC, an algorithm for predicting
protein mutant stability changes: application to prior proteins.
Protein Eng 2000, 13:849-856.
22.
Guerois R, Nielsen JE, Serrano L: Predicting changes in the
stability of proteins and protein complexes: a study of more
than 1000 mutations. J Mol Biol 2002, 320:369-387.
23.
Mendes J, Guerois R, Serrano L: Energy estimation in protein
design. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2002, 12:441-446.
24.
Parthiban V, Gromiha MM, Schomburg D: CUPSAT: prediction of
protein stability upon point mutations. Nucleic Acids Res 2006,
34:W239-W242.
25.
Capriotti E, Fariselli P, Casadio R: I-Mutant2.0: predicting
stability changes upon mutation from the protein sequence or
structure. Nucleic Acids Res 2005, 33:W306-W310.
26.

Yue P, Moult J: Identiﬁcation and analysis of deleterious human
SNPs. J Mol Biol 2006, 356:1263-1274.
A reliable platform for identiﬁcation of deleterious mutations that may
exhibit ﬁtness effects in vivo owing to loss of stability. Notably, prediction
is based on structural as well as sequence information.
27.
Lonquety M, Lacroix Z, Papandreou N, Chomilier J: SPROUTS: a
database for the evaluation of protein stability upon point
mutation. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37:D374-379.
28.
Mayer S, Ru¨ diger S, Ang HC, Joerger AC, Fersht AR: Correlation
of levels of folded recombinant p53 in Escherichia coli with
thermodynamic stability in vitro. J Mol Biol 2007, 372:268-276.
29.
ReichL,BeckerM,SecklerR,WeikelTR:Invivofoldingefﬁciencies
for mutants of the P22 tailspike b-helix protein correlate with
predicted stability changes. Biophys Chem 2009, 141:186-192.
30.
Vendruscolo M, Tartaglia GG: Towards quantitative predictions
in cell biology using chemical properties of proteins. Mol
Biosyst 2008, 12:1170-1175.
31.
Tokuriki N, Stricher F, Schymkowitz J, Serrano L, Tawﬁk DS: The
stability effects of protein mutations appear to be universally
distributed. J Mol Biol 2007, 369:1318-1332.
32.
Shoichet BK, Baase WA, Kuroki R, Matthews BW: A relationship
between protein stability and protein function. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 1995, 92:452-456.
33.
Nagatani RA, Gonzalez A, Shoichet BK, Brinen LS, Babbitt PC:
Stability for function trade-offs in the enolase superfamily
‘catalytic module’. Biochemistry 2007, 46:6688-6695.
34.
Tiana G, Broglia RA, Provasi D: Designability of lattice model
heteropolymers. Phys Rev E, Stat, Nonlin Soft Mat Phys 2001,
64:011904.
35.
Calloni G, Zoffoli S, Stefani M, Dobson CM, Chiti F: Investigating
the effects of mutations on protein aggregation in the cell. J
Biol Chem 2005, 280:10607-10613.
36.

Tokuriki N, Tawﬁk DS: GroEL/ES chaperonin overexpression
promotes genetic variation and enzyme evolution. Nature
2009, 459:668-673.
An experimental system was established to systematically measure the
capacity of the E. coli chaperonin GroEL/ES to buffer deleterious desta-
bilizing mutations and thereby enhance the rate of protein evolution. The
ﬁndings demonstrate that stability is indeed the most pronounced con-
strain on protein evolution and indicate a direct role for chaperonins in
boosting protein evolvability.
37.
Wells JA: Additivity of mutational effects in proteins.
Biochemistry 1990, 29:8509-8517.
38.
Horovitz A: Double-mutant cycles: a powerful tool for analyzing
protein structure and function. Fold Des 1996, 1:R121-126.
39.
Weinreich DM, Watson RA, Chao L: Perspective: sign epistasis
and genetic constraint on evolutionary trajectories. Evolution
2005, 59:1165-1174.
40.
Weinreich DM, Delaney NF, Depristo MA, Hartl DL: Darwinian
evolution can follow only very few mutational paths to ﬁtter
proteins. Science 2006, 312:111-114.
41.

Ortlund EA, Bridgham JT, Redinbo MR, Thornton JW: Crystal
structure of an ancient protein: evolution by conformational
epistasis. Science 2007, 317:1544-1548.
The 450 million-year-old ancestor of vertebrate glucocorticoid receptors
(GR) was reconstructed and the trajectory leading to the divergence in
this family was analyzed. Besides the accumulation of function-switching
mutations that change GR’s hormone speciﬁcity, stabilizing mutations
that allowed the protein to tolerate subsequence function-switching
changes were identiﬁed and shown to play a major role in determining
GR’s evolutionary trajectory.
42.
Bornberg-Bauer E: How are model protein structures
distributed in sequence space? Biophys J 1997, 73:2393-2403.
43.
Wilke CO, Bloom JD, Drummond DA, Raval A: Predicting the
tolerance of proteins to random amino acid substitution.
Biophys J 2005, 89:3714-3720.
Stability effects of mutations and protein evolvability Tokuriki and Tawfik
603
www.sciencedirect.com
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2009, 19:596–604


--- Page 9 ---

44.
Wagner A: Robustness, evolvability, and neutrality. FEBS Lett
2005, 579:1772-1778.
45.
de Visser JA, Hermisson J, Wagner GP, Ancel Meyers L, Bagheri-
Chaichian H, Blanchard JL, Chao L, Cheverud JM, Elena SF,
Fontana W et al.: Perspective: evolution and detection of
genetic robustness. Evol Int J Org Evol 2003, 57:1959-1972.
46.
Drummond DA, Bloom JD, Adami C, Wilke CO, Arnold FH: Why
highly expressed proteins evolve slowly. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2005, 102:14338-14343.
47.

Drummond DA, Wilke CO: Mistranslation-induced protein
misfolding as a dominant constraint on coding-sequence
evolution. Cell 2008, 134:341-352.
This work, and previous works by the same authors, point out the role of
protein synthesis errors (phenotypic mutations) in protein evolution.
Phenotypic mutations may account for the slower rates of evolution in
proteins expressed at high levels [46], and the selection against the
toxicity of mis-folded proteins generated by translational errors seems
to be a major force, especially in neuronal tissues.
48.

Goldsmith M, Tawﬁk D:: Potential role of phenotypic mutations
in the evolution of protein expression and stability. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2009, 106:6197-6202.
Experimental indications are provided that the stability margins of pro-
teins, and their ability to tolerate mutations, could be the outcome of the
need to cope with protein synthesis errors (phenotypic mutations). TEM-1
b-lactamase variants that evolved under error-prone transcription
showed higher expression levels, higher stability, and higher tolerance
to genetic mutations.
49.

Bershtein S, Goldin K, Tawﬁk DS: Intense neutral drifts yield
robust and evolvable consensus proteins. J Mol Biol 2008,
379:1029-1044.
The experiment revealed that, under high mutational loads, mutations
that increase the drifting protein’s kinetic and thermodynamic stability are
enriched. These act as global suppressors that buffer the deleterious
effects of destabilizing mutations. The global suppressors all had a
common theme—they brought the sequence of TEM-1 closer to its family
consensus and inferred ancestor. The results suggest that predictable
consensus/ancestor changes can be incorporated to generate highly
diverse and evolvable proteins.
50.
Tokuriki N, Stricher F, Serrano L, Tawﬁk DS: How protein stability
and new functions trade off. PLoS Comput Biol 2008,
4:e1000002.
51.

Bloom JD, Labthavikul ST, Otey CR, Arnold FH: Protein
stability promotes evolvability. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006,
103:5869-5874.
The experiment demonstrated that higher thermostability promotes evol-
vability (the ability of proteins to acquire changes in sequence and
function). Engineered high thermostable P450 variants, and marginally
stable variants, were used as a starting point for directed evolution toward
new P450 substrates. The highly stable variants produced more variants
with improved new catalytic activity, and only the stabilized P450s could
tolerate certain highly destabilizing mutations needed to confer a new
function.
52.
Zhang L, Watson LT: Analysis of the ﬁtness effect of
compensatory mutations. HFSP J 2009, 3:47-54.
53.
Lehmann M, Pasamontes L, Lassen SF, Wyss M: The consensus
concept for thermostability engineering of proteins. Biochim
Biophys Acta 2000, 1543:408-415.
54.
Reetz MT, Soni P, Fernandez L: Knowledge-guided laboratory
evolution of protein thermolability. Biotechnol Bioeng 2009,
102:1712-1717.
55.
Vazquez-Figueroa E, Yeh V, Broering JM, Chaparro-Riggers JF,
Bommarius AS: Thermostable variants constructed via the
structure-guided consensus method also show increased
stability in salts solutions and homogeneous aqueous-organic
media. Protein Eng Des Sel 2008, 21:673-680.
56.
Godoy-Ruiz R, Perez-Jimenez R, Ibarra-Molero B, Sanchez-
Ruiz JM: A stability pattern of protein hydrophobic mutations
that reﬂects evolutionary structural optimization. Biophys J
2005, 89:3320-3331.
57.
Lehmann M, Wyss M: Engineering proteins for thermostability:
the use of sequence alignments versus rational design and
directed evolution. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2001, 12:371-375.
58.
Gaucher EA, Govindarajan S, Ganesh OK: Palaeotemperature
trend for Precambrian life inferred from resurrected proteins.
Nature 2008, 451:704-707.
59.

Watanabe K, Ohkuri T, Yokobori S, Yamagishi A: Designing
thermostable proteins: ancestral mutants of 3-
isopropylmalate dehydrogenase designed by using a
phylogenetic tree. J Mol Biol 2006, 355:664-674.
A thermostable enzyme variant was designed using phylogenetic analy-
sis. Ancestor mutations were investigated and six out of 12 mutations
tested conferred higher thermal stability. The article demonstrated that
higher thermostability can be designed on the basis of a phylogenetic tree
and that in certain positions the ancestor sequence is more stable than
the consensus.
60.
Khersonsky O, Rosenblat M, Toker L, Yacobson S,
Hugenmatter A, Silman I, Sussman JL, Aviram M, Tawﬁk DS:
Directed evolution of serum paraoxonase PON3 by
family shufﬂing and ancestor/consensus mutagenesis,
and its biochemical characterization. Biochemistry 2009,
48:6644-6654.
61.
Williams PD, Pollock DD, Blackburne BP, Goldstein RA:
Assessing the accuracy of ancestral protein reconstruction
methods. PLoS Comput Biol 2006, 2:e69.
62.

Tokuriki N, Oldﬁeld CJ, Uversky VN, Berezovsky IN, Tawﬁk DS: Do
viral proteins possess unique biophysical features? Trends
Biochem Sci 2009, 34:53-59.
A bioinformatics analysis of viral proteins revealed that viral proteins, and
RNA viral proteins, in particular, possess unique biophysical features. In
comparison to other protein classes, they tend to have poorly packed,
partially disordered structures, and exhibit less destabilizing DDG effects
of mutations. These unique properties seem to correlate with the high
mutational rates observed in RNA viruses, and may indicate an alternative
strategy for increasing protein neutrality (tolerance to mutations) dubbed
gradient robustness (Fig. 3b).
63.
Rutherford SL: Between genotype and phenotype: protein
chaperones and evolvability. Nat Rev Genet 2003, 4:263-274.
64.
Bloom JD, Arnold FH: In the light of directed evolution:
pathways of adaptive protein evolution. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2009, 106:9995-10000.
65.
Tokuriki N, Tawﬁk DS: Protein dynamism and evolvablity.
Science 2009, 324:203-207.
604
Biophysical methods
Current Opinion in Structural Biology 2009, 19:596–604
www.sciencedirect.com